[#137] Message Transformation / Upcasting - Documentation (#4629)
AxonFramework/AxonFramework: docs/reference-guide/modules/message-transformation/pages/configuring-transformations.adoc

> = Configuring Transformations

Reviewer: I think we should use the `[.axoniq-feature]` marker to clarify this is an Axoniq Framework feature.

:navtitle: Configuring transformations

Individual transformations are assembled into an `EventTransformerChain` and registered once with your configuration.
Axon Framework then applies the chain whenever events are read from the store.

== Registering the chain

Build the chain with the transformers in the order they should run:

[source,java]

> ----

Reviewer: I'd hope we can add import statements to our samples as well. In other words, make the snippets fully compileable :-)

public static EventTransformerChain chain() {
    return EventTransformerChain.builder()                            // <1>
                                .register(SystemAnnouncementLegacyUplift.build())
                                .register(CoursePublishedV1ToV2.build()) // <2>
                                .register(CoursePublishedV2ToV3.build())
                                .register(StudentRegisteredV1ToV2.build())
                                .register(WelcomeMessageBetaCleanup.build())
                                .build();                             // <3>
}
----
<1> Start building the chain.
<2> Each transformer runs in the order it is registered. See <<_why_ordering_matters>>.
<3> `build()` produces an immutable chain, ready to register as a component.

Then make that chain available to your configuration as an `EventTransformerChain` component.

> You only ever supply the chain: a transformation enhancer detects that component and installs the event-store transformation for you, so there is nothing to wire on the event store itself.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You only ever supply the chain. The framework's configuration detects the chain and installs decorates the event store with transformation logic for you. Hence, there is nothing to wire on the event store itself for users.
```

The `chain()` shown above is the one assembled in the xref:message-transformation:demo.adoc[course catalog example].

[NOTE]
.Transformation runs before interceptors
====
The enhancer installs the transformation so that, on every read, events are transformed to their current shape _before_ any message interceptor or handler sees them.
Interceptors and handlers therefore never deal with outdated event shapes.
If you instead need an interceptor to observe the original, stored shape, replace the default transformation enhancer with your own that installs the transformation at a different order.
====

[#_why_ordering_matters]
== Why ordering matters

A stored event flows through the chain, with each matching transformer's output feeding the next, until no further transformer matches.
Register transformers in version order so each hop hands off to the one after it:

[source,java]
----
.register(CoursePublishedV1ToV2.build())   // 1.0.0 -> 2.0.0
.register(CoursePublishedV2ToV3.build())   // 2.0.0 -> 3.0.0
----

A stored v1 `CoursePublished` is lifted to v2 by the first transformer, then that result is lifted to v3 by the second, so your handler always receives the current shape.

> [TIP]

Reviewer: I think we can strengthen this a bit:
```suggestion
[IMPORTANT]
```

.Prefer small, single-step transformations
====
Write one transformer per version step (`v1` to `v2`, then `v2` to `v3`) rather than a single transformer that jumps straight from `v1` to `v3`.

> This is the incremental approach Greg Young recommends for versioning in event-sourced systems: each step stays small, isolated, and easy to reason about, and adding a new version means appending one more transformer while the chain keeps composing the steps for you.

Reviewer: I'd prefer we leave out mentioning Greg Young here. Nothing wrong with his input, as he's on point. But it's better for the documentation to be "ideator-agnostic." In other words, it's not necessary to make the point.

With a predicate `from`, that rejection happens when a matching event is read instead.
A typed mapper whose output identity differs from its declared `to`, and a cycle that exceeds the safety bound, are likewise reported as a `ChainConfigurationException`, but only when the offending event is read.
Overlapping matches are not an error: they resolve by last-match-wins, as above.
====

== Writing safe mappers

A mapper is invoked many times: once per matching event, every time those events are read.
Keep it a pure function:

* *Deterministic*: the same input always produces the same output. No clocks, randomness, counters, or calls to external services.
* *Side-effect-free and thread-safe*: no mutable shared state, and do not publish messages, write to a database, or mutate the input.

These rules keep replays reproducible and let the chain run while events stream concurrently.

== Testing a transformation

Because a transformation is a deterministic function from one payload to another, you can verify it in isolation, with no event store and no running application.
Build the transformer, feed it a sample stored payload, and assert on the transformed output.

> The xref:message-transformation:demo.adoc[course catalog example] does this with a small `given`/`when`/`then` harness, `TransformationTester`, that builds a one-transformer chain and runs the sample event through it:

Reviewer: I think it is perfectly fair to mention the team at Axoniq will provide integrated testing in the future. But that users, for the time being, can copy the `TransformationTester`.
